readme.md, before:

[![License: The MIT License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green?longCache=true)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)  [![made-with-python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Made%20with-Python-1f425f.svg)](https://www.python.org/)  [![GitHub release](https://img.shields.io/github/release/Naereen/StrapDown.js.svg)](https://GitHub.com/Naereen/StrapDown.js/releases/)

# SystemsRedfishPy

## Cross platform Python tool for provisioning and managing storage systems using the RESTful Redfish/Swordfish API.

#### Copyright (c) 2019 Seagate Technology LLC and/or its Affiliates, All Rights Reserved

## Introduction

***SystemsRedfishPy*** is a command line tool that implements the client side of the Redfish RESTful API for Storage System Management.

Source code files of the SystemsRedfishPy open source project are available to you under [The MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).  The
SystemsRedfishPy project repository is maintained at https://github.com/Seagate.

**Redfish** is the new RESTful API for hardware management defined by the DMTF Scalable Platform Management Forum (SPMF).  It provides a 
modern, secure, multi-node, extendable interface for hardware management. **Swordfish** authored by SNIA provides extensions for handling
storage specific provisioning and management. 

**SystemsRedfishPy** goes beyond common HTTP tools such as curl to provide quick and easy storage management and storage volume creation. This
tool provides simple one-step commands handling multiple Redfish URI requests in order to carry out storage management. The main features of
this package are:
 
* Command line or script file execution
* Set up is a breeze and configuration settings are modified with a **bang** (`!setting <value>`)
* Add new configuration variables via a single line with easy access routines
* Handles multiple command sets for various product brands - `!brand <product>` to switch between command sets 
* Drop in new commands to increase desired functionality - with no modifications to the infrastructure 
* Help text built in to each command file
* Built in unittest for quick regression testing of a Redfish service
* Debug logging and tracing built in for command line usage or unit test cases 
* Class modules to simplify working with URIs and JSON data 

## Background

Seagate Systems (Enterprise Data Solutions (EDS)) provides a Redfish/Swordfish Service that was first released in 2019. This
new service was first featured on the Seagate Indium product line. This package provides a reference client that can be used on
any computer with Python installed. This reference client enables you to perform configuration and maintenance operations on a
storage controller using the Redfish/Swordfish API.

The Redfish API is a standard REST API maintained by [DMTF Redfish](https://www.dmtf.org/standards/redfish). The Swordfish API
is an extension to the Redfish API maintained by [SNIA Swordfish](https://www.snia.org/forums/smi/swordfish).


## Why SystemsRedfishPy?

1. **SystemsRedfishPy** was originally written during the development of the Redfish storage service, helpful for validating
storage service operations and to quickly and easily display JSON data from various URIs.
2. **SystemsRedfishPy** was extended to provide test cases to quickly validate and report on the status of the current
Redfish service version. 
3. **SystemsRedfishPy** provides an example implementation for how a client can execute common storage management functions
like create a RAID disk group, create a storage pool, create a storage volume, and map that volume to a host computer.
4. **SystemsRedfishPy** can also be called from other scripts, used as a command line tool, or execute scripts to quickly provision
storage or check on the health of a storage system. 


## Installation

This project is maintained under [GitHub SystemsRedfishPy](https://github.com/Seagate).

The process to use this client is to clone a copy of the project to your local hard drive.

Clone the project
```
cd base_directory
git clone SystemsRedfishPy.git
cd SystemsRedfishPy
python3 redfishAPI.py
```

## Requirements

Your client computer must have Python3 installed. You will also need network access to the desired controller, and know the 
IP Address of the target controller running the Redfish Service. User credentials are required in order to create a Redfish
sessions and provision storage.

Using **SystemsRedfishPy** does not rely on any other packages. But HTML and XML packages are used if you desire to run unit test cases. 
See the [test document](UNITTEST.md) for more information.


## Quick Tutorial

This client can run in either an interactive mode, or by parsing a script file. This quick tutorial demonstrates the
interactive mode. All commands entered at the prompt can also be pasted into a text file and run as a script.

Open a terminal window and change directories to the SystemsRedfishPy folder. Run the command 'python redfishAPI.py'
and you will be presented with a '(redfish)' prompt. 

```bash
>python redfishAPI.py

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[1.0] Redfish API
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[] Run Redfish API commands interactively...

(redfish)
```

There are four main categories of commands that can be entered.
 
### Help

help - provides a list of available commands
help [command name] - provides details on a command

### Configuration Commands

There are several configuration commands useful to set up communications and tracing.

| Command            | Description |
| ------------------ | ----------- |
| !dump              | Print out all configuration options. This is useful to learn what settings are available. |
| ![setting] [value] | Change the value for that setting. |

To configure which controller to talk to:

| Command              | Description |
| -------------------- | ----------- |
| !mcip 10.235.221.120 | Change all HTTP communications to use this new ip address. |
| !username [name]     | Change the username to '[name]' that is used to log in to the Redfish Service. |
| !password [password] | Change the password to '[password]' that is used to log in to the Redfish Service. |

When running commands, you have several options to help debug issues, and to configure the system:

| Command                         | Description |
| ------------------------------- | ----------- |
| !http [https|https]             | Switch between use http:// and https:// |
| !certificatecheck [True|False]  | Perform a SSH certificate check or don't. |
| !annotate [0|1]                 | Display a banner of the script file line. |
| !urltimeout [seconds]           | How long to wait for a URL request before timing out. |
| !urltimeout [seconds]           | How long to wait for a URL request before timing out. |
| !brand [product]                | SPecifies the folder to retrieve commands from. Default is systems, but example is also provided. |
| !showelapsed [0|1]              | Display how long each command took. |
| !dumpjsondata [0|1]             | Display all JSON data read from the Redfish Service. Zero will turn it off. |
| !dumppostdata [0|1]             | Display all data that is sent via an HTTP POST operation. Zero will turn it off. |
| !trace 5                        | Turn on additional tracing at a VERBOSE level. |
| !trace 6                        | Turn on additional tracing at a DEBUG level. |
| !trace 7                        | Turn on additional tracing at a TRACE level. |
| !trace 4                        | Reset tracing to the default INFO level. |

### Redfish Commands

Most commands require that you establish a session with the target Redfish Service. To do so, use 'create session'.
This command will use the configuration settings, listed above, such as mcip, username, and password and attempt to
establish a session.

```bash
(redfish) create session

++ Establish Redfish session: (/redfish/v1/SessionService/Sessions)...
[] Redfish session established (key=8356051e862ca5de23bc2850a3903ad6)

[] Elapsed time: 0m 1s to execute command
```

The main redfish commands are used for debugging or learning more about the data returned by the Redfish Service.

For example:


| Command                     | Description |
| --------------------------- | ----------- |
| redfish json <url>          | Display the JSON data returned from a GET to <url>. Errors are also reported. |
| redfish urls [optional url] | Traverse every URL reported by the service, validate them, and produce a report. If no optional url is specified, then traversing starts with '/redfish/v1'. |


### Systems Commands

The system commands use the Redfish Service API to create volumes, display disks, and other configuration and
maintenance items.

For example:

```bash
(redfish) show disks - will display all disk drives in the system
(redfish) show pools - will display all configured virtual pools
(redfish) show volumes - will display all configured volumes
(redfish) create diskgroup name=dgA01 disks=0.7,0.8 pool=A level=raid1 - to create a new RAID1 disk group
(redfish) create volume name=TestVol01 size=100000000000 pool=A - to create a new volume
```

### Design

If you want to make changes to this reference client, there is a [design document](DESIGN.md) that provides an overview
of how to make changes and add new commands. The main system design allows you to add commands, and help for
commands, without having to change any of the underlying core files. The only step needed is to add your new
command to the 'commands' folder using the prescribed template.


### Unit Testing

If you want to run unit testing, the [unit test document](UNITTEST.md) provides an overview of how to install
the reporting packages, run unit tests, and also add new unit tests.

Commit message:

1.2.4: New http get|post|patch|delete operations and example json folder files

readme.md, after:

[![License: The MIT License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green?longCache=true)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)  [![made-with-python](https://img.shields.io/badge/Made%20with-Python-1f425f.svg)](https://www.python.org/)  [![GitHub release](https://img.shields.io/github/release/Naereen/StrapDown.js.svg)](https://GitHub.com/Naereen/StrapDown.js/releases/)

# SystemsRedfishPy

## Cross platform Python tool for provisioning and managing storage systems using the RESTful Redfish/Swordfish API.

#### Copyright (c) 2019 Seagate Technology LLC and/or its Affiliates, All Rights Reserved

## Introduction

***SystemsRedfishPy*** is a command line tool that implements the client side of the Redfish RESTful API for Storage System Management.

Source code files of the SystemsRedfishPy open source project are available to you under [The MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).  The
SystemsRedfishPy project repository is maintained at https://github.com/Seagate.

**Redfish** is the new RESTful API for hardware management defined by the DMTF Scalable Platform Management Forum (SPMF).  It provides a 
modern, secure, multi-node, extendable interface for hardware management. **Swordfish** authored by SNIA provides extensions for handling
storage specific provisioning and management. 

**SystemsRedfishPy** goes beyond common HTTP tools such as curl to provide quick and easy storage management and storage volume creation. This
tool provides simple one-step commands handling multiple Redfish URI requests in order to carry out storage management. The main features of
this package are:
 
* Command line or script file execution
* Set up is a breeze and configuration settings are modified with a **bang** (`!setting <value>`)
* Add new configuration variables via a single line with easy access routines
* Handles multiple command sets for various product brands - `!brand <product>` to switch between command sets 
* Drop in new commands to increase desired functionality - with no modifications to the infrastructure 
* Help text built in to each command file
* Built in unittest for quick regression testing of a Redfish service
* Debug logging and tracing built in for command line usage or unit test cases 
* Class modules to simplify working with URIs and JSON data 

## Background

Seagate Systems (Enterprise Data Solutions (EDS)) provides a Redfish/Swordfish Service that was first released in 2019. This
new service was first featured on the Seagate Indium product line. This package provides a reference client that can be used on
any computer with Python installed. This reference client enables you to perform configuration and maintenance operations on a
storage controller using the Redfish/Swordfish API.

The Redfish API is a standard REST API maintained by [DMTF Redfish](https://www.dmtf.org/standards/redfish). The Swordfish API
is an extension to the Redfish API maintained by [SNIA Swordfish](https://www.snia.org/forums/smi/swordfish).


## Why SystemsRedfishPy?

1. **SystemsRedfishPy** was originally written during the development of the Redfish storage service, helpful for validating
storage service operations and to quickly and easily display JSON data from various URIs.
2. **SystemsRedfishPy** was extended to provide test cases to quickly validate and report on the status of the current
Redfish service version. 
3. **SystemsRedfishPy** provides an example implementation for how a client can execute common storage management functions
like create a RAID disk group, create a storage pool, create a storage volume, and map that volume to a host computer.
4. **SystemsRedfishPy** can also be called from other scripts, used as a command line tool, or execute scripts to quickly provision
storage or check on the health of a storage system. 


## Installation

This project is maintained under [GitHub SystemsRedfishPy](https://github.com/Seagate).

The process to use this client is to clone a copy of the project to your local hard drive.

Clone the project
```
cd base_directory
git clone SystemsRedfishPy.git
cd SystemsRedfishPy
python3 redfishAPI.py
```

## Requirements

Your client computer must have Python3 installed. You will also need network access to the desired controller, and know the 
IP Address of the target controller running the Redfish Service. User credentials are required in order to create a Redfish
sessions and provision storage.

Using **SystemsRedfishPy** does not rely on any other packages. But HTML and XML packages are used if you desire to run unit test cases. 
See the [test document](UNITTEST.md) for more information.


## Quick Tutorial

This client can run in either an interactive mode, or by parsing a script file. This quick tutorial demonstrates the
interactive mode. All commands entered at the prompt can also be pasted into a text file and run as a script.

Open a terminal window and change directories to the SystemsRedfishPy folder. Run the command 'python redfishAPI.py'
and you will be presented with a '(redfish)' prompt. 

```bash
>python redfishAPI.py

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[1.0] Redfish API
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
[] Run Redfish API commands interactively...

(redfish)
```

There are four main categories of commands that can be entered.
 
### Help

help - provides a list of available commands
help [command name] - provides details on a command

### Configuration Commands

There are several configuration commands useful to set up communications and tracing.

| Command            | Description |
| ------------------ | ----------- |
| !dump              | Print out all configuration options. This is useful to learn what settings are available. |
| ![setting] [value] | Change the value for that setting. |

To configure which controller to talk to:

| Command              | Description |
| -------------------- | ----------- |
| !mcip 10.235.221.120 | Change all HTTP communications to use this new ip address. |
| !username [name]     | Change the username to '[name]' that is used to log in to the Redfish Service. |
| !password [password] | Change the password to '[password]' that is used to log in to the Redfish Service. |

When running commands, you have several options to help debug issues, and to configure the system:

| Command                         | Description |
| ------------------------------- | ----------- |
| !http [https|https]             | Switch between use http:// and https:// |
| !certificatecheck [True|False]  | Perform a SSH certificate check or don't. |
| !annotate [0|1]                 | Display a banner of the script file line. |
| !urltimeout [seconds]           | How long to wait for a URL request before timing out. |
| !urltimeout [seconds]           | How long to wait for a URL request before timing out. |
| !brand [product]                | SPecifies the folder to retrieve commands from. Default is systems, but example is also provided. |
| !showelapsed [0|1]              | Display how long each command took. |
| !dumpjsondata [0|1]             | Display all JSON data read from the Redfish Service. Zero will turn it off. |
| !dumppostdata [0|1]             | Display all data that is sent via an HTTP POST operation. Zero will turn it off. |
| !trace 5                        | Turn on additional tracing at a VERBOSE level. |
| !trace 6                        | Turn on additional tracing at a DEBUG level. |
| !trace 7                        | Turn on additional tracing at a TRACE level. |
| !trace 4                        | Reset tracing to the default INFO level. |

### Redfish Commands

Most commands require that you establish a session with the target Redfish Service. To do so, use 'create session'.
This command will use the configuration settings, listed above, such as mcip, username, and password and attempt to
establish a session.

```bash
(redfish) create session

++ Establish Redfish session: (/redfish/v1/SessionService/Sessions)...
[] Redfish session established (key=8356051e862ca5de23bc2850a3903ad6)

[] Elapsed time: 0m 1s to execute command
```

The main redfish commands are used for debugging or learning more about the data returned by the Redfish Service.

For example:


| Command                     | Description |
| --------------------------- | ----------- |
| redfish json <url>          | Display the JSON data returned from a GET to <url>. Errors are also reported. |
| redfish urls [optional url] | Traverse every URL reported by the service, validate them, and produce a report. If no optional url is specified, then traversing starts with '/redfish/v1'. |


### Systems Commands

The system commands use the Redfish Service API to create volumes, display disks, and other configuration and
maintenance items.

For example:

```bash
(redfish) show disks - will display all disk drives in the system
(redfish) show pools - will display all configured virtual pools
(redfish) show volumes - will display all configured volumes
(redfish) create diskgroup name=dgA01 disks=0.7,0.8 pool=A level=raid1 - to create a new RAID1 disk group
(redfish) create volume name=TestVol01 size=100000000000 pool=A - to create a new volume
```

### HTTP Commands

The HTTP commands allow you to do native HTTP GET, DELETE, POST, and PATCH commands.

As a note, most Redfish commands require that you establish a session with the target Redfish Service. If you use
the 'http post' command to create a session, you should also call 'save session <id> <key>' so that all following
http commands can use the session credentials.
 
| Command                             | Description |
| ----------------------------------- | ----------- |
| http get <url>                      | Perform an HTTP GET operation on a URI |
| http post <url> <json or filename>  | Perform an HTTP POST operation on a URI, sending the specified JSON data |
| http patch <url> <json or filename> | Perform an HTTP PATCH operation on a URI, sending the specified JSON data |
| http delete <url>                   | Perform an HTTP DELETE operation on a URI |

### Design

If you want to make changes to this reference client, there is a [design document](DESIGN.md) that provides an overview
of how to make changes and add new commands. The main system design allows you to add commands, and help for
commands, without having to change any of the underlying core files. The only step needed is to add your new
command to the 'commands' folder using the prescribed template.


### Unit Testing

If you want to run unit testing, the [unit test document](UNITTEST.md) provides an overview of how to install
the reporting packages, run unit tests, and also add new unit tests.
